ICNRG                                                      S. Lederer
Internet Draft                                            C. Timmerer
Intended status: Informational      Alpen-Adria University Klagenfurt
Expires: Jan 2014                                         C. Westphal
                                                               Huawei
                                                           C. Mueller
                                                             Bitmovin

                                                         July 23, 2013

                     Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN
                   draft-video-streaming-over-ICN-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not be
   published except as an Internet-Draft.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it
   as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents



Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 23, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document presents the usage of Information Centric Networks
   (ICN) for adaptive multimedia streaming and identifies problems
   which have to be considered for such applications. As solution DASH
   over ICN is presented, which leverages the recent ISO/IEC MPEG
   Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH) standard. DASH over ICN
   offers the possibility to transfer data from multiple sources as
   well as over multiple links in parallel, which is definitely an
   important feature, e.g., for mobile devices offering multiple
   network links. In addition to this, the named multimedia content is
   routed and cached efficiently by the underlying network.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................ 3
   2. Conventions used in this document ........................... 3
   3. A Short Primer on Dynamic Adaptive Streaming ................ 4
   4. Interactions of Dynamic Adaptive Streaming with ICN.......... 4
   5. DASH over CCN ............................................... 6
   6. Security Considerations...................................... 8
   7. IANA Considerations ......................................... 8
   8. Conclusions ................................................. 8


Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


   9. References .................................................. 8

  1. Introduction

   The unprecedented growth of video traffic has triggered a rethinking
   of how content is distributed, both in terms of the underlying
   Internet architecture and in terms of the streaming mechanisms to
   deliver video objects.

   In particular, the IRTF ICN working group has been chartered to
   study new architecture centered upon information; while Dynamic
   Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH)[1] has been developed to provide
   an open, common delivery mechanism for video streams that is able to
   adapt to the network conditions.

   DASH is designed to run over the current Internet architecture (more
   accurately, over HTTP) but a similar video streaming mechanism would
   be required in an ICN architecture.

   However, dynamic adaptive streaming in an ICN will encounter some
   issues that will require specific adjustment to make it fully
   functional in an ICN architecture.

   Some documents have started to consider the ICN-specific
   requirements of dynamic adaptive streaming [2][3][4][6].

   In this document, we give a brief overview of what is dynamic
   adaptive video streaming. We then consider the interactions of such
   adaptive mechanism with the ICN architecture and list some of the
   interactions any video streaming mechanism will have to consider. We
   describe an implementation of DASH over CCN as a possible mechanism
   for video streaming in an ICN architecture.

  2. Conventions used in this document

   In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and
   server respectively.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.




Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


   In this document, the characters ">>" preceding an indented line(s)
   indicates a compliance requirement statement using the key words
   listed above. This convention aids reviewers in quickly identifying
   or finding the explicit compliance requirements of this RFC.

  3. A Short Primer on Dynamic Adaptive Streaming

   The basic concept of DASH [1] is to use segments of media content,
   which can be encoded at different resolutions, bitrates, etc. as so-
   called representations. These segments are served by conventional
   HTTP Web servers and can be addressed via HTTP GET requests from the
   client. As a consequence, the streaming system is pull-based and the
   entire streaming logic is located on the client, which makes it
   scalable, and possible to adapt the media stream to the client's
   capabilities.

   In addition to this, the content can be distributed using
   conventional CDNs and their HTTP infrastructure, which also scales
   very well. In order to specify the relationship between the
   contents' media segments and the associated bitrate, resolution, and
   timeline, the Media Presentation Description (MPD) is used, which is
   a XML document. The MPD refers the available media segments using
   HTTP URLs, which can be used by the client for retrieving them.

  4. Interactions of Dynamic Adaptive Streaming with ICN

   Video streaming, and DASH in particular, have been designed with
   goals that are aligned with that of most ICN proposals. Namely, it
   is a client-based mechanism which requests items (in this case,
   chunks of a video stream) by name.

   ICN and MPEG-DASH [1] have several elements in common:

   - the client-initiated pull approach;
   - the content being dealt with in pieces (or chunks);
   - the support of efficient replication and distribution of content
      pieces within the network;
   - the session-free nature of the exchange between the client and the
      server at the streaming layer: the client is free to request any
      chunk from any location;
   - the support for potentially multiple sources.

   As ICN is a promising candidate for the Future Internet (FI)
   architecture, it is useful to investigate its suitability in
   combination with multimedia streaming standards like MPEG-DASH. In
   this context, the purpose of this draft is to present the usage of
   ICN instead of HTTP in MPEG-DASH


Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


   However, there are some issues that arise from using a dynamic rate
   adaptation mechanism in an ICN architecture:

   o Naming of the data in DASH does not necessarily follow the ICN
      convention of any of the ICN proposals. Several chunks of the
      same video stream might currently go by different names, that for
      instance do not share a common prefix. There is a need to
      harmonize the naming of the chunks in DASH with the naming
      conventions of the ICN. The naming convention of using a
      filename/time/encoding format could for instance be made
      compatible with the convention of CCN.

   o While chunks can be retrieved from any server, the rate
      adaptation mechanism attempts to estimate the available network
      bandwidth so as to select the proper playback rate and keep its
      playback buffer at the proper level. Therefore, there is a need
      to either include some location semantics in the data chunks so
      as to properly assess the throughput to a specific location; or
      to design a different mechanism to evaluate the available network
      bandwidth.

   o The typical issue of access control and accounting happens in
      this context, where chunks can be cached in the network outside
      of the administrative control of the content publisher. It might
      be a requirement from the owner of the video stream that access
      to these data chunks need to be accounted/billed/monitored.

   o Dynamic streaming multiplies the representations of a given video
      stream, therefore diminishing the effectiveness of caching:
      namely, to get a hit for a chunk in the cache, it has to be for
      the same format and encoding values. Alternatively, to get the
      same hit rate as for a stream using a single encoding, the cache
      size must be scaled up to include all the possible
      representations.

   o Caching introduces oscillatory dynamics as it may modify the
      estimation of the available bandwidth between the end user and
      the repository where it is getting the chunks from. For instance,
      if an edge cache holds a low resolution representation near the
      user, the user getting this low resolution chunks will observe a
      good performance, and will then request higher resolution chunks.
      If those are hosted on a server with poor performance, then the
      client would have to switch back to the low representation. This
      oscillation may be detrimental to the perceived QoE of the user.





Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


   o The ICN transport mechanism needs to be compatible to some extent
      with DASH. To take a CCN example, the rate at which interests are
      issued should be such that the chunks received in return arrive
      fast enough and with the proper encoding to keep the playback
      buffer above some threshold.

   o The usage of multiple network interfaces is possible in ICN,
      enabling a seamless handover between them. For the combination
      with DASH, an intelligent strategy which should focus on traffic
      load balancing between the available links may be necessary. This
      would increase the effective media throughput of DASH by
      leveraging the combined available bandwidth of all links,
      however, it could potentially lead to high variations of the
      media throughput.

   o DASH does not define how the MPD is retrieved, hence, this is
      compatible with CCN. However, the current profiles defined within
      MPEG-DASH require the MPD to contain HTTP-URLs (incl. http and
      https URI schemes) to identify segments. To enable a more
      integrated approach as described in this document, an additional
      profile for DASH over CCN has to be defined, enabling ICN/CCN-
      based URIs to identify and request the media segments.

   We now describe a potential implementation of a dynamic adaptive
   video stream over ICN, based upon DASH and CCN [5].

  5.  DASH over CCN

   DASH is intended to enable adaptive streaming, i.e., each content
   piece can be provided in different qualities, formats, languages,
   etc. to cope with the diversity of todays' networks and devices. As
   this is an important requirement for Future Internet proposals like
   CCN, the combination of those two technologies seems to be obvious.
   Since those two proposals are located at different protocol layers -
   DASH at the application and CCN at the network layer - they can be
   combined very efficiently to leverage the advantages of both and
   potentially eliminate existing disadvantages. As CCN is not based on
   classical host-to-host connections, it is possible to consume
   content from different origin nodes as well as over different
   network links in parallel, which can be seen as an intrinsic error
   resilience feature w.r.t. the network. This is a useful feature of
   CCN for adaptive multimedia streaming within mobile environments
   since most mobile devices are equipped with multiple network links
   like 3G and WiFi. CCN offers this functionality out of the box which
   is beneficial when used for DASH-based services. In particular, it
   is possible to enable adaptive video streaming handling both
   bandwidth and network link changes. That is, CCN handles the network


Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


   link decision and DASH is implemented on top of CCN to adapt the
   video stream to the available bandwidth.

   In principle, there are two options to integrate DASH and CCN: a
   proxy service acting as a broker between HTTP and CCN as proposed in
   [6], and the DASH client implementing a native CCN interface. The
   former transforms an HTTP request to a corresponding interest packet
   as well as a data packet to an HTTP response, including reliable
   transport as offered by TCP. This may be a good compromise to
   implement CCN in a managed network and to support legacy devices. As
   such a proxy is already described in [6] this draft focusses on a
   more integrated approach, aiming at fully exploiting the potential
   of CCN. That is, a native CCN interface within the DASH client,
   which adopts a CCN naming scheme (CCN URIs) to denote segments in
   the Media Presentation Description (MPD). In this architecture, only
   the network access component on the client has to be modified and
   the segment URIs within MPD have to be updated according to the CCN
   naming scheme.

   Initially, the DASH client retrieves the MPD containing the CCN URIs
   of the content representations including the media segments. The
   naming scheme of the segments may reflect intrinsic features of CCN
   like versioning and segmentation support. Such segmentation support
   is already compulsory for multimedia streaming in CCN and, thus, can
   also be leveraged for DASH-based streaming over CCN. The CCN
   versioning can be adopted in a further step to signal different
   representations of the DASH-based content, which enables an implicit
   adaptation of the requested content to the clients' bandwidth
   conditions. That is, the interest packet already provides the
   desired characteristics of a segment (such as bit rate, resolution,
   etc.) within the content name. Additionally, if bandwidth conditions
   of the corresponding interfaces or routing paths allow so, DASH
   media segments could be aggregated automatically by the CCN nodes,
   which reduces the amount of interest packets needed to request the
   content. However, such approaches need further research,
   specifically in terms of additional intelligence and processing
   power needed at the CCN nodes.

   After requesting the MPD, the DASH client will start to request
   particular segments. Therefore, CCN interest packets are generated
   by the CCN access component and forwarded to the available
   interfaces. Within the CCN, these interest packets leverage the
   efficient interest aggregation for, e.g., popular content, as well
   as the implicit multicast support. Finally, the interest packets are
   satisfied by the corresponding data packets containing the video
   segment data, which are stored on the origin server or any CCN node,
   respectively. With an increasing popularity of the content, it will


Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


   be distributed across the network resulting in lower transmission
   delays and reduced bandwidth requirements for origin servers and
   content providers respectively.

  6. Security Considerations

   This is informational. Security considerations are TBD.

  7. IANA Considerations

   This is informational. IANA considerations are TBD.

  8. Conclusions

   This draft proposed adaptive video streaming for ICN, identified
   potential problems and presented the combination of CCN with DASH as
   a solution. As both concepts, DASH and CCN, maintain several
   elements in common, like, e.g., the content in different versions
   being dealt with in segments, combination of both technologies seems
   useful. Thus, adaptive streaming over CCN can leverage advantages
   such as, e.g., efficient caching and intrinsic multicast support of
   CCN, routing based on named data URIs, intrinsic multi-link and
   multi-source support, etc.

   In this context, the usage of CCN with DASH in mobile environments
   comes together with advantages compared to today's solutions,
   especially for devices equipped with multiple network interfaces.
   The retrieval of data over multiple links in parallel is a useful
   feature, specifically for adaptive multimedia streaming, since it
   offers the possibility to dynamically switch between the available
   links depending on their bandwidth capabilities, transparent to the
   actual DASH client.

  9. References

   [1]  ISO/IEC DIS 23009-1.2, Information technology - Dynamic
         adaptive streaming over HTTP (DASH) - Part 1: Media
         presentation description and segment formats

   [2]  Lederer, S., Müller, C., Rainer, B., Timmerer, C., Hellwagner,
         H., "An Experimental Analysis of Dynamic Adaptive Streaming
         over HTTP in Content Centric Networks", in Proceedings of the
         IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo 2013, San
         Jose, USA, July, 2013





Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


   [3]  Liu, Y., Geurts, J., Point, J., Lederer, S., Rainer, B.,
         Mueller, C., Timmerer, C., Hellwagner, H., "Dynamic Adaptive
         Streaming over CCN: A Caching and Overhead Analysis", in
         Proceedings of the IEEE international Conference on
         Communication (ICC) 2013 - Next-Generation Networking
         Symposium, Budapest, Hungary, June, 2013

   [4]  Grandl, R., Su, K., Westphal, C., "On the Interaction of
         Adaptive Video Streaming with Content-Centric Networks",
         eprint arXiv:1307.0794, July 2013.

   [5]  V. Jacobson, D. Smetters, J. Thornton, M. Plass, N. Briggs and
         R. Braynard, "Networking named content", in Proc. of the 5th
         int. Conf. on Emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies
         (CoNEXT '09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 1-12.

   [6]  A. Detti, M. Pomposini, N. Blefari-Melazzi, S. Salsano and A.
         Bragagnini, "Offloading cellular networks with Information-
         Centric Networking: The case of video streaming", In Proc. of
         the Int. Symp. on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia
         Networks (WoWMoM '12), IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1-3,
         2012.

Authors' Addresses

   Stefan Lederer, Christian Timmerer
   Alpen-Adria University Klagenfurt
   Universitätsstrasse 65-67, 9020 Klagenfurt, Austria

   Email: {firstname.lastname}@itec.aau.at


   Cedric Westphal
   Huawei
   2330 Central Expressway, Santa Clara, CA95050, USA

   Email: cedric.westphal@huawei.com


   Christopher Mueller
   bitmovin GmbH
   Lakeside B01, 9020 Klagenfurt, Austria

   Email: christopher.mueller@bitmovin.net





Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Adaptive Video Streaming over ICN          July 2013


Acknowledgements

   This work was supported in part by the EC in the context of the
   SocialSensor (FP7-ICT-287975) project and partly performed in the
   Lakeside Labs research cluster at AAU. SocialSensor receives
   research funding from the European Community's Seventh Framework
   Programme. Apart from this, the European Commission has no
   responsibility for the content of this draft. The information in
   this document is provided as is and no guarantee or warranty is
   given that the information is fit for any particular purpose. The
   user thereof uses the information at its sole risk and liability.





































Lederer, et al.       Expires January 23, 2014               [Page 10]

